=head1 TSC Scripting API documentation

These are the Secret Chronicles of the Scripting API documentation,
directly from Dr. M.’s collection of rare books. It lists all objects
available from within a level’s script together with their methods.

TSC scripting is implemented with
L<MRuby|https://github.com/mruby/mruby>, a minimal implementation of
the L<Ruby programming language|https://www.ruby-lang.org>. Although
it’s not a hard-to-grasp language and intends to be as human-readable
as possible, it tries to not sacrifice principles of powerful
object-oriented programming. So, while you may understand and even
write scripts without a thorough knowledge of the Ruby language, the
key to mastering TSC’s scripting mechanism is an at least rudimental
understand of Ruby.

For those that are already familiar with the canonical Ruby
interpreter ("MRI") or one of the other great Ruby implementations
such as Rubinius or JRuby, let me point out that the "m" in "mruby"
really stands for "minimal". Don’t expect to get a fully-featured Ruby
implementation, especially regarding the standard library or I<RubyGems>,
which are simply missing. However, the language core itself should
mostly be the way you expect it.

=head2 Interaction with C++

TSC is written in C++. As such, all method calls that actually I<do>
anything in the gameplay must be translated to C++ function calls. For
this to happen, each TSC-related mruby object is wrapped around a C++
pointer that points to the actual underlying C++ object. Whenever you
call a method on the mruby object, that method unwraps the C++
pointer, translates the mruby arguments you hand to the method to
types usable for C++ and then calls the C++ object’s corresponding
function. On returning, the same process happens in reverse order.

While this knowledge may not seem important to you, it may help you
fixing obscure problems related to the fact the mruby objects are
independent from the underlying C++ pointers.

=head2 Object types

There are two ways to interact with TSC objects. The first way is to
get hold of an object already existing in the level, for example an
enemy or a block. The other way is to actively I<create> an object
yourself, by calling the corresponding object’s C<::new> method.

Once you have an mruby object you can interact with, there’s no
difference anymore between mruby objects build up around existing C++
ones and mruby objects that were created together with a C++ object.

=head3 Retrieval of existing objects

Each sprite created via the regular TSC editor (a so-called
I<internal> sprite) is assigned an identifier that is unique for the
whole of the current level, hence it is called I<unique identifier>,
or short I<UID>. You can determine an internal sprite’s UID by loading
your level into the TSC editor and hover the cursor over the object
whose UID you want to know; there the UID is displayed next to the
coordinates of the object. These UIDs are guaranteed to stay the same
between multiple level loads and even level editing (however, deleting
an object in the editor will release its UID and make it available to
other sprites). TSC maintains a global MRuby object called L<UIDS>
that references a table which maps all known UIDs to specific
instances of class L<Sprite>) or one of its subclasses.

In order to actually create an mruby object for an existing C++ object
in the level, your way goes through that L<UIDS> object. It provides
you with a method L<::[]|UIDS::[]> that determines what C++ pointer belongs to
the UID you pass it, wraps an mruby object around the pointer and
finally returns that mruby object to you. The returned mruby object is
then cached, so if you query L<UIDS> again with the same UID, you will
get the I<exact same object> back as for the first time you queried.

For example, if you wanted to unblock a path by moving a block with
UID 38 away:

    # Note that (-100|100) is outside the visible area,
    # therefore it looks as if the block "disappeared".
    block = UIDS[38]
    block.warp(-100, 100)

=head3 Creation of new objects

As mentioned above, there’s a second way to interact with the
level. Instead of passively retrieving existing objects and
interacting with them, you can actually I<create> new things and place
them in the level. To achieve this, call the corresponding class’
C<::new> method, which will generate a new C++ pointer and a new mruby
object for that pointer, with all its attributes set to TSC’s default
values for that type.

As an example, here’s how you would proceed for spawning a furball:

    furball = Furball.new
    furball.start_direction = :right
    furball.start_at(300, -300)
    furball.show

Hint: Don’t forget to call L<#show|Sprite#show> on your generated objects,
otherwise they won’t show up at all.

These generated or I<external> sprites are automatically marked as
I<generated> objects and hence are B<not> saved
when the user creates a new savegame! If you want to preserve your
generated objects through saving/loading a savegame, you have to
register for specific events on the level; see the documentation on
L<LevelClass> for more information on this.

=head2 Events

The scripting API uses an event-driven approach, i.e. whenever you’re
interested in intercepting a given action, you’re going to register an
I<event handler> for a specific I<event>. Each event is a bit different,
especially regarding the information they pass in form of arguments to
their event handlers, but the process of registering for an event is
always the same.

=over

=item 1.

You want to listen for a specific event, e.g. the C<touch> event.

=item 2.

You write an event handler accepting the parameters the event will
hand to you (e.g. the other sprite in case of the C<touch>
event).

=item 3.

You register the handler by calling the object’s
C<< on_E<lt>eventnameE<gt> >> method, e.g. C<on_touch>
for the C<touch> event, and passing it the function you wrote.

=back

The registering methods are always named
C<< on_E<lt>downcased_eventnameE<gt> >>, so once you know which event to
listen for, registering it is quite simple. For example, if you want
to kill the player when he collides with the object with UID 38, you’d
do:

    UIDS[38].on_touch do |other|
    other.kill! if other.player?
    end

Furthermore, events are inherited. This allows you for example to
register for the C<touch> event of a L<Furball>, which somewhere up the
inheritance chain is a L<Sprite> (where the C<touch> event is initially
defiend). Therefore, if you don’t find the event you’re looking for in
your object’s class’ documentation, try the superclass’ documentation.

=head2 Organisation of the documentation

The documentation is created by a helper program called C<scrdg>
(“Scripting Documentation Generator”) in the TSC source tree. This
programme parses the C++ files implementing the scripting interface
and extract specifcally marked documentation comments, transforms
their L<POD markup|https://perldoc.perl.org/perlpod.html>
into HTML and writes the results out to the F<scriptdocs/> directory below
your build directory; TSC includes a
L<POD parser|https://git.guelker.eu/pod-cpp/>
for this purpose. Most likely you’re looking at the F<index.html>
file in this directory now (if not, you’re reading the POD sources
directly).

The documentation is divided into the classes which you can access
from the MRuby side. Their descriptions always start with a general
overview of what the class/the singleton is supposed to be used for,
followed by the list of events and then a list of methods:

=over

=item 1.

The class methods. These are methods you can directly call on the
class object, without having to create an instance of that class.
When referencing class methods in the documentation, we will
always use a double-colon like this: L<Furball::new> means the
C<new()> method on the C<Furball> class.

=item 2.

The instance methods. These are methods you can call on instances of
the respective class. When referencing instance methods in the
documentation, we will alawys use a hash symbol like this:
L<MovingSprite#warp> refers to the C<warp()>
method of objects of instances of class C<MovingSprite>.

=back

Each method is introduced using its name, followed by a list of one or
more possible call sequences. A call sequence may look like this:

    play_sound( filename [, volume [, loops [, resid ] ] ] ) → a_bool

This can serve as a quick reference on how to use the method. It tells
you that the C<filename> parameter is required (because it isn’t
included in any brackets), but the other ones, like C<volume> or
C<resid>, are optional and don’t have to be passed. Fitting default
values will be assumed (the exact default values can be found in the
I<Parameters> section of the respective method, where it is included in
parantheses after the parameter’s name). Finally, the → indicates that
the methods returns something (there exist quite a number of methods
that actually do I<not> return anything interesting), and that this
something is C<a_bool>, i.e. C<true> or C<false>. You don’t have
to care for the return value if you don’t want to.

The method description continues with a detailed look on the parameter
list, describing each parameter and its default value (as already
explained above).

After this, the documentation may include a short paragraph about the
exact nature of the return value (if it’s not obvious from the name or
the call sequence).

And finally, if you’re lucky the method’s documentation may contain
some usage examples of the method. But again, this may not be the case
for all methods.

=head2 The Standard Scripting Library

At the bottom of this page, you find a list of all built-in core
objects of the TSC scripting environments. These are usually simply
referred to as "the core" and are available always without you having
to to anything. On top of this, there exist some "helper" classes
called the "standard scripting library", or SSL for short. The SSL
contains classes that built upon the functionality provided by the
core and extend them in such a way a specific task is easier to
achieve than by utilizing the core stuff "rawly". As a major
difference to the core classes, which are implemented in C++, the SSL
is solely written in Ruby code. You can find it in the scripting/std
folder of your TSC data path.

The SSL is documented in a separate set of documents.

It used to be necessary to C<require> the SSL's extensions, but
starting with version 2.1.0 of TSC this was removed. The C<Std>
namespace is now by default available to all level scripts.

Note that all standard library code is defined under the C<Std>
namespace. Do B<not> use that namespace for your own scripting
expansion packs (see below).

=head2 Scripting expansion packs

As already noted, the SSL is written entirely in Ruby, without any C++
involved. This allows you to provide I<your very own> helper classes to
be defined exactly the same way. Choose a namespace for your lib,
C<Freaky> for instance, and then place your own code below that.

    module Freaky

      class FreakyThing < Furball
        # Your code...
      end

    end

Each class should have its own file, and all files related to the
"freaky" expansion-pack should reside in a folder F<freaky/>. When
you’re done, place the F<freaky/> folder below the F<scripting/>
directory in your TSC user data directory (under Linux, this is
F<~/.local/share/tsc/scripting>). Each time TSC loads a level, all
these files are loaded in alphabetical order automatically and their
content becomes accessible via the scripting engine.

To get an impression of what to write in a scripting expansion pack,
you can always look on the SSL’s code itself.

You can also create a ZIP file or Tarball from your F<freaky/> folder
and upload it to the Internet, so everybody can download it an add it
to their own TSC installation. These ZIP or Tarball files are then
called a I<scripting expansion pack>. If you publish one, please
accompany it with some kind of license, so others can build upon
it. Ask on the TSC forums if you’re unsure what that means.

=head2 List of core classes and modules

=cut
